Link prediction (#4)
alphagov/govuk-entity-personalisation: docs/next_link_analysis.md

# Investigating relationships between successive URLs

## Predictable relationships between consecutive URLs 

The hypothesis is that there is no relationship between the sequences of government GOVUK website URLs visited by a user. Clicks are essentially randomly distributed, according to their availability. There is a natural degree of accuracy, of a naive prediction, just due the layout of the government website.

In summary:

- there is a [65%] chance that the next URL will be found in the next [10] recommended URLs
- the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) for the predictions is [0.43] on a holdout test set

These results should not be regarded in terms of good or bad, rather they just establish a reference score. This serves as a benchmark to be beaten in future tailored predictions, which incorporate additional explanatory data regarding the user. This enables meaningful discussion and development of future models. These measures should be seen as the naiive or random prediction threshold. Any future models should be better than this measure.  

## Data used

> The data used in the analysis is pulled from a single hour of usage (midday) of the GovUK website on 2020-11-13. This contains 844k unique records. As can be seen beneath, for a single `fullVisitorId`, there can be multiple values for `visitId`. It relates to hits which are classified as `PAGE`.

Reviewer: I think the last sentence could be clarified further. Is my suggestion here correct?

```suggestion
The data used in the analysis is pulled from a single hour of usage (midday) of the GovUK website on 2020-11-13. This contains 844k unique records. As can be seen beneath, for a single `fullVisitorId`, there can be multiple values for `visitId`. It relates to the fact that a `visitId` is given to each `pagePath` and user accesses, `hits`, whilst the `fullVisitorId` ties the user across `pagePath`s.
```

Author: In the SQL query, the where clause is "hits.type = 'PAGE'"

Reviewer: Updated suggestion to make it more explicit.

## Illustration of data

![visitor data](./images/visit_data_example.jpeg)

As seen, pagePath represents the URL visited.

## Rationale for considering only the preceding website

> Typically in time series processes, the most important data point is the current one, in determining the next data point. In a memoryless process, the only data point which is relevant is the current one and the following data point will be a random jump to one of the connected points in the space. In the context of the GovUK website, it is frequently the case that a visitor can only visit the next URL via the current URL.

Reviewer: ### Draft (might update this as I read further into the report)
This makes a lot of sense! Given that a visitor can only visit the next URL via the current URL, and they are offered a limited number of possible URLs to click on, then we could actually do something like a random selection and compare that with the actual clicks users have made to get an even more basic benchmark. *e.g. this gives us the accuracy if we just randomly guessed what people will click next*

### Conditioning on time

> As we are focussing on the single hour of data, we have implicitly conditioned on time. Different  predictions would be made for different slices of time. This would mean that this approach could incoporate non-stationary effects and the impact of current events. As will be discussed beneath, the model could be run in real time, as it is effectively relying on aggregations and dictionary data access which is inherently fast.

Reviewer: Ahh, so this means we don't need to decompose it to remove seasonality and trend since it is already decomposed by default?

Author: Yes, in this instance, we are only predicting using the recent window of data. As this is such a large dataset, we may not want to keep track of anything outside of the window due to storage requirements. The window needs to be long enough to smooth the patterns a bit, but short enough to remain timely.

### Conditioning on location

> Location is not considered here, but would be possible given that there is information about geolocation of the user. This simply requires consideration of aggregation weights as a function of distance, discounting information from users further away.

Reviewer: I remember Tim saying that location via IP address in the BQ data is inherently suspicious because it's not entirely accurate.

## Preparing the lagged data

The data requires a lagged URL to be created in order to see the link between current and past data. We are trying to predict the URL to be visited, by referencing the lagged URL.

Of note, a full 53% of the users on the government website only visit one link. This makes it impossible to create a lagged URL. These users data are removed from the dataset, as we cannot build a prediction conditioned on the past, as there is no history for the user.

### Removing login, search and done activity

> Any URLs for search or login are removed. Search activity only accounts for [4%] of the remaining data, which when considered in combination with the number of users who only visit one URL, is indicative of external search engines.

Reviewer: This could suggest user beliefs of how well Google Search performs vs. GOV.UK Search. Specifically, they search on Google because it returns better results than searching on GOV.UK. It's an avenue GOV.UK teams have wanted to explore further but have not had capacity to. I've written a Trello card to capture this as something we could revisit in the future.

> Login activity, [6%] of the data, was removed as its a deterministic intermediate link to certain URLs, ie the probability of `P(a->login->b)` is the same as `P(a->b)`, as `P(login->b)` is 100%. Which in turn would mean that it obscures the relationship `P(a -> b)`. This admittedly ignores the losses from people who forget their login details.

Reviewer: This is a very good line of thought, I didn't think of this but it makes complete sense!

> Done activity was also removed, approximately a further [1%] of the data. The rationale for removing done activity was that it just represents the completion of an activity or form and is not helping the user access information.

Reviewer: Is it also a completely deterministic next step. e.g. One is going through a page on *how to do a thing*, stepping through the instructions and clicking next, then they reach the end and get a *Done* page. In which case, we wouldn't want to try to predict this, right?

Author: I think so, at least, I think it makes sense to look at where the prediction errors are occurring and focus on those. There should be not prediction errors for the data where someone is filling in a form, going through a deterministic set of connected pages.

Reviewer: Yeah, though I think from previous analysis done on this by others, there were instances of user-journeys coming off the deterministic set of pages... 🤯

Author: Yes, in the case of form filling, we will have captured any unusual jumps out of the form and into a new parent URL with the way the data has been built...we are only removing the login page.

### Circular journeys

Where the next URL is the same as the preceding URL, the data is removed.

### Aggregated data - top sites

![top sites by count](./images/top_sites.png)

### Aggregated data - some low count sites

![example low count sites](./images/bottom_sites.png)

As seen, some sites have only one single visit in the data. There are 34k unique URLs in the data, in the end.

## Model build

### Train test split

> In order to build the model, the data is split using stratified sampling, so that 70% of users are in the train data, and the remainder in the test. No consideration was made for the actual time. This means that higher frequency effects than a one hour period are being ignored.

Reviewer: What are we stratifying by? Taxons?

For instance, if most of the train set is on HMRC pages, then the model is more likely to predict a HMRC related page as the next page.

![train dictionary](./images/train_dictionary.png)

### Illustration of results by parent URL

In the test set, we can aggregate by the parent URL, and find the mean reciprocal rank overall. As can be seen the results vary widely by the parent URL. The mean reciprocal rank for the companies house URL is very high, nearly 1, which reflects the dominance shown above in the category `get-information-about-a-company`.

In the same way someone should not be impressed with 50% accuracy in coin toss predictions, we should not be impressed with these results. We have just quantified the natural ease of predicting the next link on GOVUK.

![aggregated results](./images/results_by_parent_URL.png)

In contrast to the results for the `companies-house` URL, we see that the predictive performance of 'find-local-council` is poor. This reflects the high cardinality of the potential child URL. This would be partially remedied by the inclusion of location in the explanatory data.

## Final words

> The predictive power of the model should be seen as establishing an initial benchmark for the mean reciprocal rank (MRR). Other data should be included, most likely location and then ideally user specific information such as other URL activity over preceding sessions. In turn, the URL activity from previous sessions could be expressed by translating the related content into document vectors, for example using the average of the sentence embeddings, and including dwell times to weight the content. The benefit of additional data needs to be weighed up against the cost of acquiring the data and managing the computational environment necessary to process the data.

Reviewer: Dwell times is an interesting one. Tim has made good suggestions before about how misleading this can be because a user may appear to spend long on a webpage so one would naturally infer that the page is relevant, when in reality, that user might have skipped to another tab to search for something else, maybe because the link they clicked was not completely relevant. It's better than nothing though.

Author: Yes, let the algorithm determine whether dwell time is unimportant. We may well find that its still predictive, but has some non linear/bi modal behaviour due to sets of behaviours a) someone is reading the page and flicking through pages trying to actively find information b) someone opened their browser on a page and then lost focus

## Additional questions

Q. Is this not a simple tabulation of what has happened previously, to predict the future, with no regard to the user?

A. Yes, this is simply aggregating results and ordering URLs by the measure `P(new_URL|current_URL, current_time)`. We can make this more nuanced by using a tighter definition of the data we are conditioning on. For example, location and device are a good start, as these are immediately available. 

> The impact of personalisation, via addition of user specific data, should be measured against this benchmark. This then enables a cost benefit analysis (CBA) of the effort to record, store, recall and process user data, in the name of personalisation.

Reviewer: 👍
